.ve-header "Family Ties: Immigration" background=#124559


*Immigration is a topic that has presented itself various times in our Family Ties interviews. I consider it a topic that impacts numerous people both directly and indirectly. Despite the reasons that one choses to or is forced to immigrate it naturally alters the trajectory of a family history, for better or even for worse.  Here I have complied extracts of interviews where the immigration of a family member or two, is an important factor of the story being shared with us.*

---

.ve-media default:https%3A//raicesculturalcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Dorothy-Dip.jpg left height=530px width=350px caption="Dorothy Dip in traditional clothing"

All too frequently people are forced to immigrate due to violence occuring in their home countries. The decision to leave is usually met with desperation and necessity. This was the case for Tifanny Keo's mother, Dorothy Dip. Tiffany sat down with us to share the story of her mother who is a survivor of the ==Cambodian Genocide=={Q2885072} (1975-1979). The genocide began when Dorothy was just a child. Everything she knew as her home would quickly change. Dorothy's immigration story is one of survival. The decision to leave was a matter of life or death. She went to a refugee camp in Thailand as a child where she received a formal education for the first time in her life. At school in Thailand she met a teacher that believed in her talents and helped her learn English. This passion she had for learning continues to accompany her even untill today. Dorothy and her family would later go to the Philippines and lastly, they immigrated to the United States in 1983. The joy that Dorothy felt when she was able to get an eduation for the first time greatly impacted her life. Though she was recieved her education under less than ideal circumstances she would take this passion and turn it into a career. When Tiffany was growing up her mother instilled this love of learning in her which would also lead Tiffany to persue her own career in education. Though Dorothy had to live through and endure horrible things her experiences taught her that no matter what happens in life no one can take your education from you.   


>**_"I guess that’s the thing. That’s such a typical immigrant, a child of immigrant story. Is you have... you’re essentially forced to grow up in two different cultures at the same time. Whether they are similar or not so similar. But you have to straddle however many worlds you have to..." - Tiffany Keo_**

Layla Ahmed's grandparents, Mohammed and Shirin Talukder, have a similar story of immigrating to survive. In 1971, only a few weeks after getting married, Layla's grandparents had to face the unimaginable. Mohammed was working as a doctor in Koitok Hospital and as was customary of the time Shirin went home to visit her family after the wedding. While the newlyweds were separated the ==Bagladesh Liberation War (1971)=={Q371394} broke out and the couple was unaware if the other was dead or alive. Each of them had interesting experiences during the war. Shirin and her family had to flee their home because Shirin's father had been the former capitan of the West Pakistan Army and they feared the army would be looking for him. And back at the hospital Mohammed was secretly sending supplies to the Freedom Fighters behind the backs of the West Pakistan Army which had taken over the hospital as their own camp. Shirin and Mohammed were reunited and once the war was over they decided to establish themselves in another country while Bangladesh got back on it's feet. 

>**_" I was shocked more so when I first heard the full story and I was thinking wow they’re very brave and resilient for kind of not just how they acted, but also their attitude towards the war is very much... yeah it happened but look at everything else that we’ve done."_**

.ve-media compare right height=530px width=450px caption="Mohammed and Shirin (1980's/present day)"
    - default:https%3A//raicesculturalcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/MohammedShirin-present-day-edited.jpg
    - default:https%3A//raicesculturalcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/MohammedShirin-80s-edited.jpg
    
They first moved to Nigeria where Mohammad was able to continue his medical career. After many years the family tried to immigrate to Dublin but weren't able to because Mohammed's doctor's license was not valid there so they tried their luck in England only to find themselves in the same situaiton. The family had to move back to Nigeria with the plan of immigrating to the United States where Shirin had family. In the U.S. Shirin worked at an electronics factory and Mohammed stayed at home with their youngest son. In later years the couple had their own small business. Their original plan of moving back to Bangladesh never came to fruition and Mohammed had to come to terms with the fact that he would never be a practicing doctor again. Despite the obstacles they faced it was all worth it due to the opportunities and safety afforded to them in the U.S. which they might not have ever found in Bangladesh. Mohammed and Shirin's immigration story is not just one of survival but also of constant reinvention not only as indivduals but also as a family. 


Last year Claudia Portillo recounted the fascinating story of her great-grandfather Roberto Wolff. Roberto was from a Jewish family that immigrated to El Salvador from Paris, France at the end of the 19th century. The family established themselves in El Salvador by opening a store. One of the family's housemaids became pregnant with Roberto's child and to avoid a scandal he was sent away to France. A country in which his family was from, but one that was unfamiliar to him. Unfortunately, Roberto did not have contact with the daughter he left behind until the 1960's when he attempted to contact her via letter. The letter he sent was a shot in the dark as the rest of his family had immgrated back to France some years after he was sent away. Somehow the letter made it into Claudia's grandmother's hands which led to some back and forth communication with her estranged father. 

.ve-media default:https%3A//raicesculturalcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Wolff-Army-scaled.jpg left height=345px width=345px caption="Roberto Wolff in the army"

Many years later Claudia inhereted the original letter and learned some harrowing information about her family in France. Such as Roberto's participation as a soldier in both of the World Wars and that her great-uncle Mauricio and his family had been victims of the Holocaust. It is impossible to know what could have been of the family had they stayed in El Salvador but one could imagine that they might have avoided such tragedy.This story of immigration is different because Roberto was forced to immigrate to France due to his family's fear of societal judgement. This in turn not only affected Roberto and his family, but also Claudia's grandmother, Rosa, and her life. Though this story is a special case we can reflect on the fact that immigration can be forced upon us by our families rather than a decision we make for ourselves.      

>**_"One of the things that I am trying to capture or recapture is our traditions...  of course we’re diaspora, right, we’re not going to have full [story]... there’s a lot we lose by leaving or by being forced out, right. There’s a lot we lose by that so I’m just hoping that people understand that we come from an extremely rich and diverse culture in Central America. And we need to recuperate a lot."_**

Immigration is such a universal but unqiue experience. The decision to immigrate is often a desperate last option that many people around the world are faced with daily. The journey doesn't always end as one intends it to and that can be something good or bad. As desendants of immigrants it is important that we keep the tradition of storytelling alive. Even if immigration is an everyday topic we should always share the stories of our family members that had to brave great unknowns. Because it's not only their story but ours as well and the more we share with each other the more we learn about ourselves and who we are in this world.  



_Interested in hearing more stories from our Family Ties: Stories That Inspire? Take a look at our oral history archive:_
[https://raicesculturalcenter.org/digital-project/familyties/](https://raicesculturalcenter.org/digital-project/familyties/)
